Hey welcome back everyone.
We've got a very big topic here by big I don't mean long difficult challenging but more so central hugely
important crucial to all of javascript that topic is functions functions in some people's minds at least
are the one topic that you must understand to be a good javascript developer.
They are central to the language.
I know I've really overused that phrase in this course because all the things we've covered so far are
important.
We use them in pretty much every application or script we ever write.
We're definitely going to use variables and data structures or raising objects.
We'll have logic with conditionals we'll use loops we'll use functions but more than that functions
are very important to the way javascript is structured.
They're crucial to JavaScript identity as a language.
And you'll see what I mean.
As we progressed through the rest of the course it's not only about defining our own functions and learning
the syntax but also there are a lot of quirks with functions.
A lot of things we can do that are cool with functions that just take some time to understand.
So it's a big topic because it's important because it's something we use every single time we write
code basically from here on out.
So we're not going to understand and cover every single topic around functions in this one section.
We have a couple of main goals for this section.
We want to understand the basics what is a function.
Why do you use them.
And then mostly how do we define them.
What's the syntax.
And then we'll write a ton of.
Example functions.
We'll have some exercises code along.
We just need to get practice.
So functions are not difficult at least writing your own functions.
It's pretty straightforward but there are a lot of things to understand about functions different variations
different capabilities or features and that will all unfold across a couple of sections.
So it's not all concentrated right here.
OK.
So let's begin what the heck is a function.
A function is simply a reusable procedure.
It's a chunk of code that we've wrapped up in a function.
So it's a bunch of lines of code that we can call again at any point.
We can refer back to it.
So we can have a function called Get the latest read it posts and anytime we called it it would have
code inside of it that would presumably request new Reddit posts and send them back to us where we could
have a simpler one find average in array or just find average or we could have a function called Square.
And it simply squares a value every time we pass in a numbers like 10.
It should return to square one hundred.
So we make these chunks of code their little machines which is why I'm using this sort of imagery here
mechanical stuff.
It's a bunch of code that we put together and we wrap it up into a package.
And the advantage of doing this is that we can then call that chunk of code we can call that function
later on which is kind of what this visual is supposed to represent.
I had a really hard time coming up with a graphic for functions.
This represents the function the machinery.
And then this button right here is calling that function every time we press it.
The function does its thing it does its action.
So there's a two step process for every function that we ever use that we write.
First we define the function we laid out.
We tell javascript here is how this thing should work.
It's kind of like registering it or going to the.
I don't know the DMV filling out forms saying here's this new function but that doesn't do anything
as far as running the code.
It's just defining it telling javascript about the function.
Then the second step is to execute the function to run it and we can run it once.
We could run it 100 times.
It's totally up to you and when you need to use it.
But the point here is that it's a two step process.
You write it and then you run it.
We've been working with quite a few functions.
So far we've been calling the methods which is important.
It is a distinction in terminology.
It's one we will address later once we learn how to write our own methods but methods are functions.
They are actions.
Are chunks of code that have been wrapped up given a name and made into a repeatable function.
So things like Hello Dot to uppercase to uppercase is a built in method which again we'll just call
a function for now it's a built in function.
Every time I call it I need to use parentheses.
It's referring back to the same definition of the same built in set of instructions that says Here is
how to uppercase works.
So we're skipping the first step because it's a built in function or method.
We're simply running that code.
It's already been defined or written for us.
But notice we use parentheses.
We've seen that before.
It's the exact same thing when we're running our own functions.
So we've been using functions but we haven't been defining them.
How do we define our own.
There are quite a few different sin taxes and syntax ie different ways of writing functions in JavaScript.
The one we'll focus on for now at least is called a function declaration or a function statement.
It looks like this the keyword is space.
And then a name for the function which is totally up to you.
As long as it's a valid name so you don't want to name your function const.
You don't want to name your function function or for or if but in general.
Name it whatever you want just don't put spaces in there.
It has to be a valid identifier shouldn't start with a number and then parentheses open and closing
parentheses.
Sometimes you put stuff in there which we'll get to shortly and then curly braces and we write our code
in here.
Whatever code we put in here in the body of the function will be called when this function runs.
So here's a simple trivial obnoxious example I'm defining a function called Grumps.
It doesn't mean anything at all.
It's just printing out three grouchy consoles out lugs OG you again for the last time.
Leave me alone.
And every time we call grump it's these three lines would be printed up so it doesn't seem useful because
this is not useful.
Why would you ever need this.
Why would you need a function called Grumps.
We'll get two useful ones but the pattern is very important.
Function is a keyword space and then our function name with parentheses curly braces.
We put some content inside so let's define it over here.
Function Grumps parentheses and then console don't log three things.
There we go and just copy it over.
We have three dot dialogues.
I'm gonna save this file and refresh the page.
Nothing happens all that we've done is tell javascript.
Here is a function called the Grumps but it's never running or just registering it or letting javascript
know.
Here's a thing called Grumps.
So to run it.
Which is the second step.
All we do is write the name of the function followed by parentheses just like we've done with string
methods like two uppercase.
We add those parents if we leave them off.
You might remember we talked about this briefly in one of the videos.
It's almost like Javascript is telling us.
Oh yeah.
Yeah I know what that thing is that was registered with me.
It's showing us there's some code in this case native code built in code but it's not actually running
it.
We have to add those parents so same thing for Grumps.
If I simply typed Grumps and I don't add those poor friends I'm seeing from javascript that this is
a function.
It's been registered.
It exists but I'm not running it.
I'm just referencing it so I need those poor friends.
And there we go.
My three lines actually run.
The function is executed so grump is let's do it three times Grumps Grumps will save and refresh the
page.
And now we get nine consoles out logs.
We've defined our function and we've executed it two steps and we can execute it like this.
We get executed in a loop.
If I wanted to loop 20 times for I equals zero I less than or equal let's do less than let's do 50 plus
plus we've got a whole flock of grimaces.
I can call Grumps refresh the page and we get a whole lot of Grumps Krampus text printed out a very
stupid and grumpy function.
But the point is not the content it is the format.
Function keyword space.
Some function name.
Whatever this name is you must reference later.
So if I tried to call Grumps with a capital G that doesn't exist I get an error.
It has to match the name we gave it up here and then print in order to execute it.
All right.
So this is just the beginning.
Oh very quickly see some more useful functions.
We've got a lot more to talk about.